near final-draft edits of Zed spec (#3319)
brimdata/zed: docs/data-model/README.md

The [_SQLite file format_](https://sqlite.org/fileformat.html)
is arguably the _de facto_ standard for relational data,
but this format describes a whole, specific database --- indexes and all ---
rather than a stand-alone table.

Instead, file formats like Avro, ORC, and Parquet arose to represent tabular data
with an explicit schema followed by a sequence of values that conform to the schema.
While Avro and Parquet schemas can also represent semi-structured data, all of the
values in a given Avro or Parquet file must conform to the same schema.
The [Iceberg specification](https://iceberg.apache.org/#spec/)
defines data types and metadata schemas for how large relational tables can be
managed as a collection of Avro, ORC, and/or Parquet files.

### 1.2 The Semi-structured Pattern

JSON, on the other hand, is the ubiquitous example of the semi-structured pattern.
Each JSON value is self-describing in terms of its
structure and types, though the JSON type system is limited.

When a sequence of JSON objects is organized into a stream
(perhaps [separated by newlines](http://ndjson.org/))
each value can take on any form.
When all the values have the same form, the JSON sequence

> begins to look like a relational table but the lack of a comprehensive type system,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
begins to look like a relational table, but the lack of a comprehensive type system,
```

a union type, and precise semantics for columnar layout limits this interpretation.

[BSON](https://bsonspec.org/)
and [Ion](https://amzn.github.io/ion-docs/)
were created to provide a type-rich elaboration of the
semi-structured model of JSON along with performant binary representations
though there is no mechanism for precisely representing the type of
a complex value like an object or an array other than calling it
type "object" or type "array", e.g., as compared to "object with field s
of type string" or "array of number".

> The [JSON Schema specification](https://json-schema.org/)
> has addressed JSON's lack of schemas with an approach to augment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[JSON Schema](https://json-schema.org/) addresses JSON's lack of schemas with an approach to augment
```

one or more JSON values with a schema definition itself expressed in JSON.
This creates a parallel type system for JSON, which is useful and powerful in many
contexts, but introduces schema-management complexity when simply trying to represent
data in its natural form.

### 1.3 The Hybrid Pattern

As the utility and ease of the semi-structured design pattern emerged,
relational system design, originally constrained by the tabular-structured
design pattern, has embraced the semi-structured design pattern
by adding support for semi-structured table columns.
"Just put JSON in a column."

> [SQL++](https://asterixdb.apache.org/docs/0.9.3/sqlpp/manual.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[SQL++](https://asterixdb.apache.org/docs/0.9.7.1/sqlpp/manual.html)
```

pioneered the extension of SQL to semi-structured data by
adding support for referencing and unwinding complex, semi-structured values,
and most modern SQL query engines have adopted variations of this model.

> But, once you have put a number of columns of JSON data into a relational

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But once you have put a number of columns of JSON data into a relational
```

table, is it still appropriately called "structured"?
Instead, we call this approach the hybrid tabular-/semi-structured pattern,
or more simply, _"the hybrid pattern"_.

## 2. Zed: A Super-structured Pattern

The insight in Zed is to remove the tabular and schema concepts from
the underlying data model altogether and replace them with a granular and
modern type system inspired by general-purpose programming languages.
Instead of defining a single, composite schema to
which all values must conform, the Zed type system allows each value to freely
express its type in accordance with the type system.

In this approach,
Zed is neither tabular nor semi-structured.  Zed is "super-structured".

> In particular, the Zed "record type" looks like a schema but when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In particular, the Zed record type looks like a schema but when
```

> serializing Zed data, the model is very different.  A Zed sequence is not
> comprised of a record-type declaration followed by a sequence of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
serializing Zed data, the model is very different.  A Zed sequence does not
comprise a record-type declaration followed by a sequence of
```

while also preserving its super-structure.

This is precisely what Zed enables.  A system layer above and outside
the scope of the Zed data layer can decide how to adapt to the structural
changes with or without administrative intervention.

To this end, whether all the values must conform to a schema and
how schemas are managed, revised, and enforced is all outside the scope of Zed;
rather, the Zed data model provides a flexible and rich foundation
for schema interpretation and management.

### 2.2 Type Combinatorics

A common objection to using a type system to represent schemas is that
random applications generating arbitrarily structured data can result in
a combinatoric explosion of types for each shape of data.

In practice, this condition rarely arises.  Applications generating
"arbitrary" JSON data generally conform to a well-defined set of
JSON object structures.

A few rare applications carry unique data values as JSON object keys,
though this is considered bad practice.

Even so, this is all manageable in the Zed data model as types are localized
in scope.  The number of types that must be defined in a stream of values

> is linear in size to the input.  Since data is self-describing and there is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is linear in the input size.  Since data is self-describing and there is
```

no need for a global schema registry in Zed, this hypothetical problem is moot.

### 2.3 Analytics Performance

> One might think that by removing schemas from the Zed data model would conflict

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One might think that removing schemas from the Zed data model would conflict
```

> with an efficient columnar format for Zed, which is critical in the
> high-performance analytics use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with an efficient columnar format for Zed, which is critical for
high-performance analytics.
```

After all, database
tables and formats like Parquet and ORC all require schemas to organize values

> then rely upon the natural mapping of schemas to columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and then rely upon the natural mapping of schemas to columns.
```

Super-structure, on the other hand, provides an alternative approach to columnar structure.

> Instead of defining a schema then fitting a sequence of values into their appropriate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of defining a schema and then fitting a sequence of values into their appropriate
```

> columns based on the schema, Zed values self-organize int columns based on their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
columns based on the schema, Zed values self-organize into columns based on their
```

super-structure.  Here columns are created dynamically as data is analyzed
and each top-level type induces a specific set of columns.  When all of the
values have the same top-level type (i.e., like a schema), then the Zed columnar
object is just as performant as a traditional schema-based columnar format like Parquet.

### 2.4 First-class Types

> With a first-class types, any type can also be a value, which means that in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With first-class types, any type can also be a value, which means that in
```

a properly designed query and analytics system based on Zed, a type can appear

> anywhere that a value can appear.  In particular, types can be group-by keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
anywhere that a value can appear.  In particular, types can be aggregation keys.
```

This is very powerful for data discovery and introspection.  For example,

> the count the different shapes of data, you might have a SQL-like query,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to count the different shapes of data, you might have a SQL-like query,
```

> operating on each input values called `this`, that has the form:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operating on each input value as `this`, that has the form:
```

```
  SELECT count(), typeof(this) as shape GROUP by shape, count
```
Likewise, you could select a sample value of each shape like this:
```
  SELECT shape FROM (
    SELECT any(this) as sample, typeof(this) as shape GROUP by shape,sample
  )
```
The Zed language is exploring syntax so that such operations are tighter
and more natural given the super-structure of Zed.  For example, the above

> two SQL-like queries could be written as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
two SQL-like queries are written in Zed as:
```

Author: it's not one to one

```
  count() by shape:=typeof(this)
  any(this) by shape:=typeof(this) | cut shape
```

### 2.5 First-class Errors

In SQL based systems, errors typically

> result in cryptic messages or null values offering little insight as to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
result in cryptic messages or null values offering little insight into the
```

actual cause of the error.

Zed however includes first-class errors.  When combined with the super-structured
data model, error values may appear anywhere in the output and operators

> can propagate or easily wrap errors so complicated, pipelines of analytics
> operators can be debugged by analyzing the location of errors in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can propagate or easily wrap errors so complicated analytics pipelines can
be debugged by observing the location of errors in
```

the output results.

## 3. The Data Model and Formats

The concept of super-structured data and first-class types and errors
is solidified in the [specification of the Zed data model](zed.md),
which defines the model but not the serialization formats.

A set of companion documents define a family of tightly integrated
serialization formats that all adhere to the same Zed data model,
providing a unified approach to row, columnar, and human-readable formats:

* [ZSON](zson.md) is a JSON-like, human readable format for Zed data.  All JSON
documents are Zed values as the ZSON format is a strict superset of the JSON syntax.
* [ZNG](zng.md) is a row-based, binary representation of Zed data somewhat like
Avro but with Zed's more general model to represent a sequence of arbitrarily-typed
values.
* [ZST](zst.md) is a columnar version of ZNG like Parquet or ORC but also
embodies Zed's more general model for hetereogeneous and self-describing schemas.
* [Zed over JSON](zjson.md) defines a JSON format for encapsulating Zed data

> in JSON for easy transmission and decoding to JSON-based clients as is
> implemented by the [Zealot JavaScript library](https://github.com/brimdata/zealot)
> and the [Zed Python library](../../python).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in JSON for easy decoding in JSON-based clients like the
[Zealot JavaScript library](https://github.com/brimdata/zealot)
and the [Zed Python library](../../python/zed).
```

```
{ city:string, state:string, population:uint32 }
```
When all the values in a sequence have the same record type, the sequence
can be interpreted as a _table_, where the ZSON record values form the _rows_
and the fields of the records form the _columns_.  In this way, these
three records form a relational table conforming to the schema `city_schema`.

In contrast, a ZSON text representing a semi-structured sequence of log lines
might look like this:
```
{
    info: "Connection Example",
    src: { addr: 10.1.1.2, port: 80 (uint16) } (=socket),
    dst: { addr: 10.0.1.2, port: 20130 (uint16) } (=socket)
} (=conn)
{
    info: "Connection Example 2",
    src: { addr: 10.1.1.8, port: 80 (uint16) } (=socket),
    dst: { addr: 10.1.2.88, port: 19801 (uint16) } (=socket)
} (=conn)
{
    info: "Access List Example",
    nets: [ 10.1.1.0/24, 10.1.2.0/24 ]
} (=access_list)
{ metric: "A", ts: 2020-11-24T08:44:09.586441-08:00, value: 120 }
{ metric: "B", ts: 2020-11-24T08:44:20.726057-08:00, value: 0.86 }
{ metric: "A", ts: 2020-11-24T08:44:32.201458-08:00, value: 126 }
{ metric: "C", ts: 2020-11-24T08:44:43.547506-08:00, value: { x:10, y:101 } }
```

> In this case, the first records defines not just the a record type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, the first records defines not just a record type
```

called `conn`, but also a second embedded record type called `socket`.

> The parenthesized decorators are used where a type is not gleaned from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parenthesized decorators are used where a type is not inferred from
```

the value itself:
* `socket` is a record with typed fields `addr` and `port` where `port` is an unsigned 16-bit integer, and
* `conn` is a record with typed fields `info`, `src`, and `dst`.

The subsequent value defines a type called `access_list`.  In this case,
the `nets` field is an array of networks and illustrates the helpful range of
primitive types in ZSON.  Note that the syntax here implies
the type of the array, as it is inferred from the type of the elements.

Finally, there are four more values that show ZSON's efficacy for
representing metrics.  Here, there are no type decorators as all of the field
types are implied by their syntax, and hence, the top-level record type is implied.

> For instance, the `ts` field is an RFC 3339 date/time string,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, the `ts` field is an RFC 3339 date and time string,
```
